# Testing Scripts

This directory contains scripts for CI testing.

* regtest.sh -- This is a Bash-based script to test any target. To
run, cd to grammar-vs/ or a grammar directory, then type `bash regtest.sh <target>`
where `<target>` is Antlr4cs, Cpp, CSharp, Dart, Go, Java, PHP, or Python3.
To test the target, you will need the NET SDK installed (required for the trgen
driver generator), access to the internet, and to toolchain for the target
you want to test. You will also need to set the Antlr4 tool.

* test.ps1 -- this is a Powershell script for testing, similar to regtest.sh.

Both scripts use trgen to generate a program from the pom.xml file
in the grammar source. The tool generates a parser program for one of the target
langauges, currently CSharp, Java, Cpp, Dart, Go, and Python. The generated
code contains makefiles and Powershell files to present an idealized interface
to build and run the parse with the examples, so you do not need to memorize how
to build and run the parser for the given target.

To build and run the parser using the makefiles, you must be in an environment
that provides make and Bash. Ubuntu provides that out of the box. For Windows,
you must use MinGW64, then "pacman install [make](https://packages.msys2.org/package/mingw-w64-x86_64-make)"
and provide a symbolic linked file for "make" once installed. I don't know why,
but the package doesn't define just a plain old "make.exe".

    cd to a grammar directory, e.g., `cd abnf`.
    trgen -t CSharp --template-sources-directory _scripts/templates/ --antlr-tool-path /tmp/antlr-4.9.3-complete.jar
    make
    make test

Please note the parameters to trgen: "--template-sources-directory" is used
to say where to find the templates used in this repo for the driver programs.
By default, trgen has a collection of generic templates, and while they are
generic, you might want to test the grammars in this repo with the templates
used in CI builds.

For Windows or Ubuntu, you may want to provide
a "~/.trgen.rc" file to override defaults for that program.
For example,

    {
        "antlr_tool_path" : "c:/users/kenne/downloads/antlr-4.9.3-complete.jar"
    }

For the trwdog tool, you may want to override the default 5 minute timeout
for parse tests to complete, e.g., if you are on a slow machine. To do that,
create a "~/.trwdog.rc" file.

    {
        "Timeout" : 2
    }


The home directory is computed via the C# runtime:
`Environment.GetFolderPath(Environment.SpecialFolder.UserProfile)`.

# Templates for CI testing

These are the templates for testing the grammars, which are used by the
above scripts and
[trgen](https://github.com/kaby76/Domemtech.Trash/tree/main/trgen).

If you add or delete any files from the templates/ directory you should regenerate
the file templates/files using `cd templates/; find . -type f > files`. Otherwise,
the trgen tool may not add the new template files into your generated code.

## What version of trgen do I use?

You should take care to specify a version when installing the trgen tool.
I change the tool often, and there may be regressions. Currently version 0.13.2
works well.

## Structure

All the templates are in the "per-target directory" standard:
* A template directory contains files that are instantiated in the generated output directory.
* Contained in the template directory are sub-directories named after the target, e.g., CSharp, Java, JavaScript, etc. Those files are copied to the generated output directory, but only for the specified target for trgen.

Here is the structure of the default templates:

    templates/
        Antlr4cs/
            Program.cs
            Test.csproj
            makefile
        CSharp/
            ErrorListener.cs
            Program.cs
            Test.csproj
            makefile
        Cpp/
        Dart/
            analysis_options.yaml
            cli.dart
            makefile
            pubspec.yaml
        Go/
            Program.go
            makefile
        Java/
            ErrorListener.java
            Program.java
            makefile
        JavaScript/
            index.js
            makefile
            package.json
        Python3/
            Program.py
            makefile
        files
        Arithmetic.g4
 
Driver code is generated by merging the code containing the grammar and sources in grammars-v4 with the template source code. For example, for `trgen -t CSharp` in grammars-v4/abb/, the tool will extract from the pom.xml file details about the grammar, copy the source files from grammars-v4/abb/ to Generated/, then copy the template files from templates/CSharp to Generated/. The end result is:

    Generated/
        abbParser.g4       (from the source abb/abbParser.g4)
        abbLexer.g4       (from the source abb/abbLexer.g4)
        ErrorListener.cs  (from the source templates/CSharp/ErrorListener.cs)
        makefile   (from the source templates/CSharp/makefile)
        Program.cs   (from the source templates/CSharp/Program.cs)
        Test.csproj   (from the source templates/CSharp/Test.csproj)

All files in templates/ are [StringTemplate](https://github.com/antlr/stringtemplate4/blob/master/doc/introduction.md) files. To see how it is used, I suggest looking at the default set of templates for the tool [here](https://github.com/kaby76/Domemtech.Trash/tree/main/trgen/templates). Look closely for template attribute references, which begin with '<' and end with '>'. (To avoid template attribute replacement, escape '<' with a backslash, e.g., '\<'. You only need to do the '<', not the closing '>' symbol.)

Trgen will construct and pass to the template evaluator the following attributes:

| Attribute | Type | Default |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| additional_sources | list<string> | This is a list of input files with the suffix for the target, e.g., all .cpp files for Cpp. |
| antlr_tool_path | string | Ubuntu: "~/Downloads/antlr-4.9.1-complete.jar" Win: Environment.GetFolderPath(Environment.SpecialFolder.UserProfile) + "/Downloads/antlr-4.9.1-complete.jar" |
| cap_start_symbol | string | same as `start_symbol`, but first letter capitalized |
| cli_bash | bool | Ubuntu: true; Win: false |
| cli_cmd | bool | Ubuntu: false; Win: true |
| cmake_target | string | Win: '-G "MSYS Makefile"'; Ubuntu: '' |
| exec_name | string | Ubuntu: Test; Win: Test.exe |
| has_name_space | bool | only true if the pom.xml has non-empty `<packageName>` specified |
| is_combined_grammar | bool | true if the grammar is a combined grammar. |
| lexer_grammar_name | string | the name of the grammar file file, or just the combined grammar file name. |
| lexer_name | string | from pom.xml `<grammarName>` + "Lexer" |
| name_space | string | value in pom.xml `<packageName>` |
| parser_name | string | from pom.xml `<grammarName>` + "Parser" |
| path_sep_colon | bool | Ubuntu: true; Win: false |
| path_sep_semi | bool | Ubuntu: false; Win: true |
| start_symbol | string | from pom.xml `<entryPoint>` |
| temp_dir | string | Win: c:/temp; Ubuntu: /tmp. This is used for the Cpp target |
| tool_grammar_files | List<string> | computed; names of grammar files with relative path from output directory |
| tool_grammar_tuples | { string GrammarFileName, string GeneratedFileName, string GrammarAutomName } | computed from `tool_grammar_files`, `parser_name`, `lexer_name`. Example: [{ "abbLexer.g4", "abbLexer.cs", "abbLexer" }, ...] |
| version | string | version number of trgen |

## How template code is instantiated

To generate the driver code from templates for a grammar, you will need
to have the NET SDK installed. Afterwards, install `trgen`:

    dotnet tool install -g trgen --version 0.5.3

To create a driver program:

1) Change directory to __grammar__ directory, e.g., `cd abb`.
2) `trgen -t Java --template-sources-directory ../_scripts/templates/`

You will need to pass to trgen
`--template-sources-directory ../_scripts/templates/` to indicate the path
to the templates. If you do not pass the --template-sources-directory option,
the tool will use the default templates contained with the tool. You can
generate a different target using `-t`. Acceptable targets are
Antlr4cs, Cpp, CSharp, Dart, Go, Java, JavaScript, Python3.
The "files" directory in the templates
directory indicates what files are included in generation, and obtained
via "find . -type f > files".
